Add API details GEP-3779 (#3891)
kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api: geps/gep-3779/index.md

An identity-based authorization API is essential because it provides a structured way to control authorization between identities within the cluster.

### Current AuthZ Support within Meshes

Istio, Linkerd, and Cilium all support identity-aware authorization via vendored policies, but differ in mechanics and philosophy. Istio and Linkerd rely on mTLS-derived identities tightly coupled with service accounts, while Cilium broadens the scope using BPF-based identities tied to labels, IPs, and SPIFFE. Istio offers policy layering (namespace/system-wide), including support for DENY and CUSTOM rules, enforced at sidecars or ztunnel/waypoints. Linkerd injects proxies, emphasizes mTLS, and supports ALLOW/AUDIT — there's no DENY. Cilium stands apart with L3–L7 policy enforcement (via kernel or envoy), and broader match targets including pod/node selectors and CIDRs. It also uniquely maps identities into the datapath ([#CiliumIdentity[#CiliumIdentity]]), and supports explicit default-deny enforcement patterns. See [#state-of-the-world](#state-of-the-world) for more detailed comparison.

## API

> This GEP introduces a new policy resource, `AuthorizationPolicy`, for **identity-based** authorization. The policy defines a target, a single `ALLOW`, and a set of rules that include sources (the “who”) and an optional port attribute.

Reviewer: @mikemorris I agree, but I'll let @LiorLieberman commit it instead of me. 🙂

A key challenge with `LabelSelector` is the loss of discoverability. It’s easier to see which policies target a `Service` but difficult to determine which policies might affect a specific pod.

To address this, **investment in tooling is required.** Specifically, the `gwctl` CLI tool should be enhanced to provide insights such as:

```sh
gwctl describe pods pod1 

...
InheritedPolicies:
  Type                   Name                                 Target Kind   Target Name/Expression
  ----                   ----                                 -----------   -----------
  AuthorizationPolicy  demo-authz-policy-on-payment-pods      Pod           Selector={foo: a, bar: 2}
...

# List all AuthorizationPolicy resources in json format in the active namespace
gwctl get authorizationPolicy -o json

```

Without dedicated tooling, the `LabelSelector` approach could significantly degrade the user experience and observability.

##### Targeting All **Pods** in a Namespace

A common case for authorization is to target all the workloads in the namespace (where the policy resource lives). We can achieve the above with a few patterns:

###### Option 1

> Target a namespace, `name` MUST be empty (will be the namespace where the policy resource lives).

Author: done

    // Status defines the current state of AuthorizationPolicy.
    Status PolicyStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`
}

// AuthorizationPolicyAction specifies the action to take.
// +kubebuilder:validation:Enum=ALLOW
type AuthorizationPolicyAction string

const (
    // ActionAllow allows requests that match the policy rules.
    ActionAllow AuthorizationPolicyAction = "ALLOW"
)

// AuthorizationPolicySpec defines the desired state of AuthorizationPolicy.
type AuthorizationPolicySpec struct {
    // TargetRef identifies the resource this policy is attached to.
    // (will be translated to CEL later):
    //   - When Kind is Pod, Name MUST be Empty, Selector MUST be set, Max targetRef length is 1. 
    //   - Otherwise multiple refs as long as Kind isn't Pod, selector MUST NOT be set
    // +kubebuilder:validation:Required
    TargetRefs []gatewayv1.PolicyTargetReferenceWithLabelSelectors `json:"targetRefs"`

    // Action specifies the action to take when a request matches the rules.
    // +kubebuilder:validation:Required
    Action AuthorizationPolicyAction `json:"action"`

    // Rules defines the list of authorization rules.

>     // A request matches the policy if it matches any of these rules.

Author: I think we should still have "request" as a noun for matches, otherwise its less clear

>     // A request matches the policy if it matches any of these rules.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    // The policy action is applied to the request if it matches **any** of these rules.
```
Better?

>     // A request matches the policy if it matches any of these rules.

Reviewer 2: Yes, your suggestion sounds good to me!

```suggestion
    // The policy action is applied if the request matches any of these rules"
```

    // Traffic is matched if it is going to any of these ports.
    // If not specified, the rule applies to all ports.
    // +optional
    Ports []gatewayv1.PortNumber `json:"ports,omitempty"`
}

```

Note: More advanced logic like negation or explicit Boolean operations is left for potential future work.

## Future Enhancements

### DENY Policies

We start without DENY policies in scope, DENY policies _may_ be added in future iterations.

### Future L7 Support

It is very likely that graduation of this API will also require adding L7 support to it. However, after numerous conversations on this topic, the decision is to start with L4 only and leave L7 for future iterations. The details of how L7 support could look like is not in scope for this GEP.

## Graduation Criteria and Guardrails

This GEP is starting as Experimental with X-prefix. We would like to define some guardrails to avoid being stuck with experimental api in the project forever.

GEP is removed after 3 releases unless:

  1. There is more than 1 implementation (implementations that are nearing completion can count here)
  2. There are conformance tests in place

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. The label selector pattern is added to the policy attachment definition in GEP-713.

```

From discussion in https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/3891/files#r2551591308, we don't want to encourage this pattern elsewhere or add it to GEP-713 until we determine it is necessary, but we shouldn't graduate this resource to standard while this pattern is still experimental.

@guicassolato @LiorLieberman @kflynn

* Network policies leverage labels as identities.
  * Labels are mutable at runtime. This opens a path for escalating privileges
  * Most implementations of network policies translate labels to IPs, this involves an eventual consistency nature which can and has led to over permissiveness in the past.

* Scale. Network Policies are enforced using IPs (different selectors in the APIs get translated to IPs). This does not scale well with large clusters or beyond a single cluster

An identity-based authorization API is essential because it provides a structured way to control authorization between identities within the cluster.

### Current AuthZ Support within Meshes

> Istio, Linkerd, and Cilium all support identity-aware authorization via vendored policies, but differ in mechanics and philosophy. Istio and Linkerd rely on mTLS-derived identities tightly coupled with service accounts, while Cilium broadens the scope using BPF-based identities tied to labels, IPs, and SPIFFE. Istio offers policy layering (namespace/system-wide), including support for DENY and CUSTOM rules, enforced at sidecars or ztunnel/waypoints. Linkerd injects proxies, emphasizes mTLS, and supports ALLOW/AUDIT — there's no DENY. Cilium stands apart with L3–L7 policy enforcement (via kernel or envoy), and broader match targets including pod/node selectors and CIDRs. It also uniquely maps identities into the datapath ([#CiliumIdentity](#CiliumIdentity)), and supports explicit default-deny enforcement patterns. See [#state-of-the-world](#state-of-the-world) for more detailed comparison.

Reviewer 3: Ok. I see L7 is out of scope for now.

## API

This GEP introduces a new policy resource, `AuthorizationPolicy`, for **identity-based** authorization. The policy defines a target, a single `ALLOW`, and a set of rules that include sources (the “who”) and an optional port attribute.

This GEP does not define support for L7 authorization policy (see the [Future Enhancement](#future-enhancements) section to for more information).

### Policy Rules

> Each `AuthorizationPolicy` resource contains a list of rules. A request matches the policy if it matches **any** rule in the list (logical OR). Each rule defines multiple matching criteria; a request matches a rule only if it matches **all** criteria within that rule (logical AND).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each `AuthorizationPolicy` resource contains a list of rules. The policy action is applied if the request matches **any** rule in the list (logical OR). Each rule defines multiple matching criteria; a request matches a rule only if it matches **all** criteria within that rule (logical AND).
```

Since Label selectors are widely supported by all implementations for L4 authorization, we will begin with a `LabelSelector` inside targetRef to allow targeting a set of pods.

The [Future-Enhancements](#future-enhancements) section of this GEP gets into more background, complications, and recommended solution for incorporating L7 support to this policy.

**Benefits:**

* Aligns with established practices. Mesh implementations (Istio, Linkerd, Cilium) already use label selectors as the primary mechanism for targeting workloads in their native authorization policies, creating a consistent user experience.
* Directly applies policy to pods, avoiding ambiguity present when targeting Services. Ensures policies are enforced exactly where intended, regardless of how many Services a pod might belong to.
* Policies can apply to any workload, including pods not exposed via a `Service`, providing a comprehensive authorization solution.

**Downsides and Open Questions:**

The main downside of `LabelSelector` is the huge increase to the complexity of policy discoverability. See below for more info.

**Requirement: Enhancing Policy Attachment:**

> This option depends on enhancements to Gateway API’s policy attachment model to support `LabelSelector` as a valid `targetRef`. This capability was discussed and received consensus at KubeCon North America 2024 and was originally in scope for GEP-713 but deferred for a future PR to keep GEP-713 focused on stabilizing what we already have (See [https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/3609#discussion_r2053376938](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/3609#discussion_r2053376938)).

Author: The goal here is to use this API to experiment with this idea, and bring it back to policy attachment if the experiment yields positive feedback. I dont think we will standardize this in a GEP before we get some very experimental feedback here. 

cc: @mikemorris

> This option depends on enhancements to Gateway API’s policy attachment model to support `LabelSelector` as a valid `targetRef`. This capability was discussed and received consensus at KubeCon North America 2024 and was originally in scope for GEP-713 but deferred for a future PR to keep GEP-713 focused on stabilizing what we already have (See [https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/3609#discussion_r2053376938](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/3609#discussion_r2053376938)).

Reviewer: FTR I strongly agree with @mikemorris here – it feels premature to block on the GEP-713 change.

* **Gateway API Community First:** Allows experimentation within Gateway API policies (like the one in this GEP).
* Implementations **should not** adopt `LabelSelector` targeting in their own custom policies attached to Gateway API resources until the pattern is sufficiently battle-tested and promoted to a standard feature. This staged approach mitigates risks of ecosystem fragmentation.

Here is how it is going to look like:

```go

// PolicyTargetReferenceWithLabelSelectors specifies a reference to a set of Kubernetes
// objects by Group and Kind, with an optional label selector to narrow down the matching
// objects.
//
// Currently, we only support label selectors when targeting Pods.
// This restriction is intentional to limit the complexity and potential
// ambiguity of supporting label selectors for arbitrary Kubernetes kinds.
// Unless there is a very strong justification in the future, we plan to keep this
// functionality limited to selecting Pods only.
//
// This is currently experimental in the Gateway API and should only be used
// for policies implemented within Gateway API. It is currently not intended for general-purpose
// use outside of Gateway API resources.

> // +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule="!(has(self.selector)) || (self.kind == 'Pod' && (self.group == '' || self.group == 'core'))",message="Selector may only be set when targeting Pods."

Author: I think one of the worries that came up in one of the threads above is that label selectors to select _anything_ is worrying. So better to scope it for Pod. 

Its on the type so we dont communicate the message "gwapi now moves to support label selectors to select any kind"

To address this, **investment in tooling is required.** Specifically, the `gwctl` CLI tool should be enhanced to provide insights such as:

```sh
gwctl describe pods pod1 

...
InheritedPolicies:
  Type                   Name                                 Target Kind   Target Name/Expression
  ----                   ----                                 -----------   -----------
  AuthorizationPolicy  demo-authz-policy-on-payment-pods      Pod           Selector={foo: a, bar: 2}
...

# List all AuthorizationPolicy resources in json format in the active namespace
gwctl get authorizationPolicy -o json

```

Without dedicated tooling, the `LabelSelector` approach could significantly degrade the user experience and observability.

##### Targeting All **Pods** in a Namespace

A common case for authorization is to target all the workloads in the namespace (where the policy resource lives). We can achieve the above with a few patterns:

###### Option 1

Target a namespace, `name` MUST be empty (will be the namespace where the policy resource lives).

```yaml
targetRefs:
- Kind: Namespace
```

> This however gives the (confusing) impression that Gateways (whether in-cluster or off-cluster gateways) are targeted as well. Beyond the question of "does it really make sense for an E/W policy to be applicable to a N/S Gateway?" it leaves no way for users to do a namespace wide policy that excludes Gateways (no way to exclude Off-cluster Gateways with labels -- see option 3 for alternative).

Reviewer 3: Ref:

> To avoid ambiguity in the interpretation of the targets, **policy designs MUST clearly define the extent of the effects of the policy respectively to the object kinds they can target** (semantics of scoping a policy). This can be done via documentation and it typically refers to a known hierarchy of resource kinds.

https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/geps/gep-713/#declared-targets-versus-effective-targets

}

// AuthorizationPolicyAction specifies the action to take.
// +kubebuilder:validation:Enum=ALLOW
type AuthorizationPolicyAction string

const (
    // ActionAllow allows requests that match the policy rules.
    ActionAllow AuthorizationPolicyAction = "ALLOW"
)

// AuthorizationPolicySpec defines the desired state of AuthorizationPolicy.
type AuthorizationPolicySpec struct {
    // TargetRef identifies the resource this policy is attached to.
    // (will be translated to CEL later):
    //   - When Kind is Pod, Name MUST be Empty, Selector MUST be set, Max targetRef length is 1. 
    //   - Otherwise multiple refs as long as Kind isn't Pod, selector MUST NOT be set
    // +kubebuilder:validation:Required
    TargetRefs []gatewayv1.PolicyTargetReferenceWithLabelSelectors `json:"targetRefs"`

    // Action specifies the action to take when a request matches the rules.
    // +kubebuilder:validation:Required
    Action AuthorizationPolicyAction `json:"action"`

    // Rules defines the list of authorization rules.
    // A request matches the policy if it matches any of these rules.
    // +optional
    Rules []AuthorizationRule `json:"rules,omitempty"`

> }

Reviewer 2: The note in the GEP very explicitly says we do not want to start without it though?

> Note: The whole point of this Enum is to encourage explicitness, we **do not** want to start without it and default to Network if and when introduced later.

> }

Reviewer 4: As @mikemorris has it though, this means that _every_ AuthorizationPolicy _must_ specify the enforcementLevel.

We could consider making this `+optional` with a default, which would mean you don't have to set it. But, that would preclude making it required later (optional -> required is a breaking API change).

const (
  // AuthorizationSourceTypeSPIFFE is used to identify a request matches a SPIFFE Identity.

  AuthorizationSourceTypeSPIFFE AuthorizationSourceType = "SPIFFE"

  // AuthorizationSourceTypeServiceAccount is used to identify a request matches a ServiceAccount from within the cluster.

  AuthorizationSourceTypeServiceAccount AuthorizationSourceType = "ServiceAccount"
)

// Source specifies the source of a request.
//
// Type must be set to indicate the type of source type.
// Similarly, either SPIFFE or Serviceaccount can be set based on the type.
//
type Source struct {

    // +unionDiscriminator
    // +kubebuilder:validation:Enum=ServiceAccount;SPIFFE
    // +required
    Type AuthorizationSourceType `json:"type"`

    // spiffe specifies an identity that is matched by this rule.
    //
    // spiffe identities must be specified as SPIFFE-formatted URIs following the pattern:
    //   spiffe://<trust_domain>/<workload-identifier>
    //
    // While the exact workload identifier structure is implementation-specific,
    // implementations are encouraged to follow the convention of
    // `spiffe://<trust_domain>/ns/<namespace>/sa/<serviceaccount>`

>     // when representing Kubernetes workload identities.

Author: Why not? I think we actually should recommend in order to have implementors at least try to follow the recommendation. I think the recommendation right now is pretty flexible. Will be much easier to recommend now and converge later instead of not recommending and trying to converge later if we ever decides to (anticipate much more variations will happen). 

Its true that right now we dont have a lot of meshes, but who knows, maybe this gep will bring some :)

    //   mTLS certificate presented during connection establishment.
    // - From IP-to-identity mappings: The implementation might maintain a dynamic
    //   mapping between source IP addresses (pod IPs) and their associated
    //   identities (e.g., Service Account, SPIFFE IDs).
    // - From JWTs or other request-level authentication tokens.
    //
    // Note for reviewers: While this GEP primarily focuses on identity-based
    // authorization where identity is often established at the transport layer,
    // some implementations might derive identity from authenticated tokens or sources
    // within the request itself.
    //
    // +optional
    SPIFFE *AuthorizationSourceSPIFFE `json:"spiffe,omitempty"`

    // ServiceAccount specifies a Kubernetes Service Account that is
    // matched by this rule. A request originating from a pod associated with
    // this serviceaccount will match the rule.
    //
    // The ServiceAccount listed here is expected to exist within the same
    // trust domain as the targeted workload, which in many environments means
    // the same Kubernetes cluster. Cross-cluster or cross-trust-domain access

>     // should instead be expressed using the `SPIFFE` field.

Author: Actually I also think its crucail to call out that its the same trust domain of the targeted workload.

>     // should instead be expressed using the `SPIFFE` field.

Reviewer 2: Yea you're right, "cross-cluster ... with different trust domains" is just redundant.

    // +optional
    ServiceAccount AuthorizationSourceServiceAccount `json:"serviceAccount,omitempty"`
}

type AuthorizationSourceSPIFFE AbsoluteURI

type AuthorizationSourceServiceAccount struct {
  // Namespace is the namespace of the ServiceAccount
  // If not specified, current namespace (the namespace of the policy) is used.
  Namespace *Namespace `json:"namespace,omitempty"`

  // Name is the name of the ServiceAccount. 
  // Use "*" to indicate all serviceaccounts in the namespace.
  // +required
  Name string `json:"name"`
}

// AuthorizationAttribute defines L4 properties of a request destination.
type AuthorizationNetworkAttributes struct {
    // Ports specifies a list of destination ports to match on.
    // Traffic is matched if it is going to any of these ports.
    // If not specified, the rule applies to all ports.
    // +optional

>     Ports []gatewayv1.PortNumber `json:"ports,omitempty"`

Reviewer 2: I think there's some prior art either in an ancient thread in Gateway API or somewhere in https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/network-policy-api/ about how port ranges (e.g. `5000-5200`) might be specified. An array of port numbers is _probably fine_ for an initial implementation, but I'd expect we might want a breaking change here before any potential advancement to standard unless we want to limit this to a singular `port` field to allow a backwards-compatible `ports` field to be added later.

Author: Are you familiar with any implementation that does port ranges? I have not encountered this use case too much

Reviewer 2: In ClusterNetworkPolicy (recently renamed from AdminNetworkPolicy), `ports` is an array of [ClusterNetworkPolicyPort](https://network-policy-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/spec/#policy.networking.k8s.io%2fv1alpha2.ClusterNetworkPolicyPort) objects, which can express a single `portNumber`, a `portRange`, or a `namedPort`

For use cases in AuthZ policy, some databases do weird things like have clients open connections on dynamic ports in a range https://stackoverflow.com/questions/49218476/connection-to-sql-server-uses-random-ports

### Policy Rules

Each `AuthorizationPolicy` resource contains a list of rules. A request matches the policy if it matches **any** rule in the list (logical OR). Each rule defines multiple matching criteria; a request matches a rule only if it matches **all** criteria within that rule (logical AND).

A rule may specify:

  * **Sources:** The source identities to which the rule applies. A request’s identity must match one of the listed sources. Supported sources are:
    * **SPIFFE ID**
    * **Kubernetes ServiceAccount** (with the ability to specify a whole namespace)

  * **Attributes:** Conditions on the target workload, at the time of writing this, only port is supported. If no attributes are specified, the rule applies to all traffic toward the target.

### Policy Actions

Note: GAMMA leads met on 24th July 2025, and agreed that DENY is not going to be in scope for the initial iteration and will _potentially_ be added later.

  * An **ALLOW** policy is permissive.
  * A request is allowed if:
    * It matches at least one rule in any ALLOW policy targeting the workload

  * If no ALLOW policy exists for a workload, traffic is permitted by default.

> See [#ALLOW and DENY](#allow-and-deny-policies) for interaction with DENY and how above semantics is slightly changed with the presence of DENY policies.

Author: removed

  Selector *metav1.LabelSelector `json:"selector"`
}

```

##### Enhanced Discoverability with `gwctl`

A key challenge with `LabelSelector` is the loss of discoverability. It’s easier to see which policies target a `Service` but difficult to determine which policies might affect a specific pod.

To address this, **investment in tooling is required.** Specifically, the `gwctl` CLI tool should be enhanced to provide insights such as:

```sh
gwctl describe pods pod1 

...
InheritedPolicies:
  Type                   Name                                 Target Kind   Target Name/Expression
  ----                   ----                                 -----------   -----------
  AuthorizationPolicy  demo-authz-policy-on-payment-pods      Pod           Selector={foo: a, bar: 2}
...

# List all AuthorizationPolicy resources in json format in the active namespace
gwctl get authorizationPolicy -o json

```

Without dedicated tooling, the `LabelSelector` approach could significantly degrade the user experience and observability.

##### Namespace-Wide Policies

A common case for authorization is to target a whole namespace. We can achieve the above with a few patterns:

###### Option 1

> Target a namespace, name MUST be empty (as this is already namespaced policy)

Reviewer: As described, `targetRef` doesn't include `name` -- did you intend to include it? 🙂 

Part of the reason I ask is experience with trust-manager, which _only_ allows selecting namespaces using label selectors, which is incredibly annoying if you just want to say "put the trust bundle in the `linkerd` namespace". Targeting a namespace by name makes sense; only allowing a label selector doesn't really help much when your target is a single namespace.

Author: Good catch about name.

>only allowing a label selector doesn't really help much when your target is a single namespace.

Not sure I understand, can you elaborate here? Targeting a namespace by name is rather confusing, as the policy is namespace scoped, it can not possibly target a namespace thats not the namespace it is deployed in.

empty label selector, while not perfect, signals "everything in this namespace"

Author: added clarifications, PTAL

```yaml
targetRefs:
- Kind: Namespace
```

This however gives the (confusing) impression that Gateways (whether in-cluster or off-cluster gateways) are targeted as well. Beyond the question of "does it really make sense for an E/W policy to be applicable to a N/S Gateway?" it leaves no way for users to do a namespace wide policy that excludes Gateways (no way to exclude Off-cluster Gateways with labels -- see option 3 for alternative).

###### Option 2

Leaving an empty targetRefs. While this is theoretically possible without a breaking change, this would be another fundamental change to policy attachment (to allow policies without a targetRef).
Additionally, this is also suffer from the same problem of being perceived as an applicable scope for both Gateways and Workloads in the namespace.

This option is also inconsistent with other API fields where an empty field or absence of a it does not mean select all. See [recent comment](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/3887#discussion_r2176125600) on the proposal for empty ParentRef field.

###### Option 3 (Recommended)

> An empty pod selector. Kubernetes official docs clarify that the semantics of empty selectors are the decision of the API owner. In fact, many Kubernetes APIs (I know Service API does the opposite :/) using empty selectors as a select-all mechanism. See [NetworkPolicy podSelector](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/generated/kubernetes-api/v1.33/#networkpolicy-v1-networking-k8s-io), PodDisruptionBudget, ResourceQuota, and more.

Reviewer: Re-asking a question from several rounds ago: so are you suggesting that targeting a namespace means targeting all Pods in that namespace? or something else?

(WRT Gateways, note that it _is_ meaningful in many cases for a workload in a cluster to send a request to a Gateway in the same cluster, so it is definitely meaningful to talk about E/W auth when talking to the Gateway. If you view the Gateway as a point where you cross an administrative boundary, it's not even necessarily all that weird.)

We start by only support the Network value, and Application is kept for future iteration.

Note: The whole point of this Enum is to encourage explicitness, we **do not** want to start without it and default to Network if and when introduced later.

```go

// EnforcementLevel defines the scope at which an AuthorizationPolicy is enforced.
//
// There are two enforcement levels:
//
//   - Network: Enforces the policy at the network layer (L4), typically at
//     network proxies or gateway dataplanes. Only supports attributes available
//     at connection time (e.g., source identity, port). Recommended for broad,
//     coarse-grained access controls.
//
//     NOTE FOR REVIEWRS -- THIS IS FOR FUTURE ENHANCEMENT
//
//   - Application: Enforces the policy at the application layer (L7), typically at
//     HTTP/gRPC-aware sidecars or L7 proxies. Enables fine-grained authorization
//     using protocol-specific attributes (e.g., HTTP paths, methods).
//
// This field clarifies policy intent and informs where enforcement is expected
// to happen. It also enables implementation-specific validation and behavior.
//

> // +kubebuilder:validation:Enum=Network;Application

Reviewer: If only `Network` is supported, I'd think validation shouldn't allow `Application`.

type EnforcementLevel string
```

### API Design

```go

type AuthorizationPolicy struct {
    metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
    metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`

    // Spec defines the desired state of AuthorizationPolicy.
    Spec AuthorizationPolicySpec `json:"spec,omitempty"`

    // Status defines the current state of AuthorizationPolicy.
    Status PolicyStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`
}

// AuthorizationPolicyAction specifies the action to take.
// +kubebuilder:validation:Enum=ALLOW
type AuthorizationPolicyAction string

const (
    // ActionAllow allows requests that match the policy rules.
    ActionAllow AuthorizationPolicyAction = "ALLOW"
)

// AuthorizationPolicySpec defines the desired state of AuthorizationPolicy.
type AuthorizationPolicySpec struct {
    // TargetRef identifies the resource this policy is attached to.
    // (will be translated to CEL later):

>     //   - When Kind is Pod, Name MUST be Empty, Selector MUST be set, Max targetRef length is 1. 

Reviewer: See previous comments about `name`.

    // Source specifies who is making the request.
    // If omitted, matches any source.
    // +optional
    Source *AuthorizationSource `json:"source,omitempty"`

    // NetworkAttributes specifies TCP-level matching criteria.
    // If omitted, matches any TCP traffic.
    // +optional
    NetworkAttributes *AuthorizationNetworkAttributes `json:"networkAttributes,omitempty"`
}

// Source specifies the source of a request.
//
// At least one field may be set. If multiple fields are set,
// a request matches this Source if it matches
// **any** of the specified criteria (logical OR across fields).
//
// For example, if both `Identities` and `ServiceAccounts` are provided,
// the rule matches a request if either:
// - the request's identity is in `Identities`
// - OR the request's Serviceaccount matches an entry in `ServiceAccounts`.
//
// Each list within the fields (e.g. `Identities`) is itself an OR list.
//
// If this struct is omitted in a rule, it matches any source.
//
// NOTE: In the future, if there’s a need to express more complex
// logical conditions (e.g. requiring a request to match multiple
// criteria simultaneously—logical AND), we may evolve this API

> // to support richer match expressions or logical operators.

Reviewer: Good candidate for the "don't include this in godocs" marker, I think...

    // To select all Serviceaccounts in the current namespace, use "<namespace>/*" explicitly.
    //
    // Example:
    //   - "default/bookstore" → Matches Serviceaccount "bookstore" in namespace "default"
    //   - "payments/*" → Matches any Serviceaccount in namespace "payments"
    //   - "frontend" → Matches "frontend" Serviceaccount in the same namespace as the policy
    //
    // The ServiceAccounts listed here are expected to exist within the same
    // trust domain as the targeted workload, which in many environments means
    // the same Kubernetes cluster. Cross-cluster or cross-trust-domain access
    // should instead be expressed using the `Identities` field.
    // 
    // +optional 
    ServiceAccounts []string `json:"serviceAccounts,omitempty"`
}

// AuthorizationAttribute defines L4 properties of a request destination.
type AuthorizationNetworkAttributes struct {
    // Ports specifies a list of destination ports to match on.
    // Traffic is matched if it is going to any of these ports.
    // If not specified, the rule applies to all ports.
    // +optional
    Ports []gatewayv1.PortNumber `json:"ports,omitempty"`
}

```

> Note: Existing AuthorizationAPIs recognized the need to support negation fields like `not{field}`. To avoid duplicating fields with negation, we plan to support richer match expressions for fields in `AuthorizationSource` such as `matchExpressions: { operator: In|NotIn, values: []}`.

Reviewer: Another "out of scope for now" bit. "More advanced logic like negation or explicit Boolean operations is left for potential future work" maybe.

## Future Enhancements

### DENY Policies

We start without DENY policies in scope, DENY policies _may_ be added in future iterations.

### Future L7 Support

It is very likely that graduation of this API will also require adding L7 support to it. However, after numerous conversations on this topic, the decision is to start with L4 only and leave L7 for future iterations. The details of how L7 support could look like is not in scope for this GEP.

## Graduation Criteria and Guardrails

This GEP is starting as Experimental with X-prefix. We would like to define some guardrails to avoid being stuck with experimental api in the project forever.

GEP is removed after 3 releases unless:

  1. There is more than 1 implementation (implementations that are nearing completion can count here)
  2. There are conformance tests in place

GEP is removed after 6 releases if it hasn't graduated to GA.

## Conformance Details

### Feature Names

> Two new feature sets will be added - AuthorizationPolicyCoreFeatures, and later, AuthorizationPolicyExtendedFeatures.

Author: These are feature sets, you are right that within those sets we will have `AuthorizationPolicyDeny` `AuthorizationPolicyGRPC` etc. 

The feature set can be used to say "I support all authzpolicy extended, or all authzpolicy core", these are not supportedFeatures by themselves, more like a container.

)

// AuthorizationPolicySpec defines the desired state of AuthorizationPolicy.
type AuthorizationPolicySpec struct {
    // TargetRef identifies the resource this policy is attached to.
    // (will be translated to CEL later):
    //   - When Kind is Pod, Name MUST be Empty, Selector MUST be set, Max targetRef length is 1. 
    //   - Otherwise multiple refs as long as Kind isn't Pod, selector MUST NOT be set
    // +kubebuilder:validation:Required
    TargetRefs []gatewayv1.PolicyTargetReferenceWithLabelSelectors `json:"targetRefs"`

    // Action specifies the action to take when a request matches the rules.
    // +kubebuilder:validation:Required
    Action AuthorizationPolicyAction `json:"action"`

    // Rules defines the list of authorization rules.
    // A request matches the policy if it matches any of these rules.
    // +optional
    Rules []AuthorizationRule `json:"rules,omitempty"`
}

// AuthorizationRule defines a single authorization rule.
// A request matches the rule if it matches ALL fields specified.
type AuthorizationRule struct {
    // AuthorizationSource specifies who is making the request.
    // If omitted, matches any source.
    // +optional

>     AuthorizationSource *AuthorizationSource `json:"authorizationSource,omitempty"`

Reviewer 5: It's better to keep it just "Source" as it is self explanatory as it is in AuthoriztaionPolicy.

// objects by Group and Kind, with an optional label selector to narrow down the matching
// objects.
//
// Currently, we only support label selectors when targeting Pods.
// This restriction is intentional to limit the complexity and potential
// ambiguity of supporting label selectors for arbitrary Kubernetes kinds.
// Unless there is a very strong justification in the future, we plan to keep this
// functionality limited to selecting Pods only.
//
// This is currently experimental in the Gateway API and should only be used
// for policies implemented within Gateway API. It is currently not intended for general-purpose
// use outside of Gateway API resources.
// +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule="!(has(self.selector)) || (self.kind == 'Pod' && (self.group == '' || self.group == 'core'))",message="Selector may only be set when targeting Pods."
type PolicyTargetReferenceWithLabelSelectors struct {
  // Group is the group of the target object.
  Group Group `json:"group"`

  // Kind is the kind of the target object.
  Kind Kind `json:"kind"`

  // Selector is the label selector of target objects of the specified kind.

>   Selector *metav1.LabelSelector `json:"selector"`

Reviewer: Mentioning this here too: there are places where we've seen folks want to do different policies on different ports.

>   Selector *metav1.LabelSelector `json:"selector"`

Author: You can achieve that with the port attribute, wouldn't this be sufficient? The thread here was about whether port is part of the Target or not and the implication of such decision.

```sh
TODO: complete gwctl commands
```

Without dedicated tooling, the `LabelSelector` approach could significantly degrade the user experience and observability.

### API Design

```go

type AuthorizationPolicy struct {
    metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
    metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`

    // Spec defines the desired state of AuthorizationPolicy.
    Spec AuthorizationPolicySpec `json:"spec,omitempty"`

    // Status defines the current state of AuthorizationPolicy.
    Status PolicyStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`
}

// AuthorizationPolicyAction specifies the action to take.
// +kubebuilder:validation:Enum=ALLOW;DENY
type AuthorizationPolicyAction string

const (
    // ActionAllow allows requests that match the policy rules.
    ActionAllow AuthorizationPolicyAction = "ALLOW"
    // ActionDeny denies requests that match the policy rules.
    ActionDeny AuthorizationPolicyAction = "DENY"
)

// AuthorizationPolicySpec defines the desired state of AuthorizationPolicy.
type AuthorizationPolicySpec struct {
    // TargetRef identifies the resource this policy is attached to.
    // +kubebuilder:validation:Required

>     TargetRefs []gatewayv1.PolicyTargetReferenceWithLabelSelectors `json:"targetRefs"`

Reviewer 5: why do we need a list here? I think we only accept one pod right?

Author: TargetRef Pod = name must be empty, selector must be set, length must be 1
Otherwise multiple refs as long as target isn't Pods, selector can't be set

Reviewer 5: Please add a CEL validaion for the same.

##### CiliumIdentity

> Cilium has the concept of CiliumIdentity. Pods are assigned identities derived from their Kubernetes labels (namespace, app labels, etc.). Cilium’s policy matches based on these label-derived identities. The CiliumIdentity implementation maps an integer to a group of IP addresses (the pod IPs associated with a group of pods). This “integer” and its mapping to pod IP addresses represents the core identity primitive in Cilium.

Reviewer 6: Can't comment on file as a whole, so commenting on first line - you need to make a corresponding entry in mkdocs.yml so nav works here - see https://deploy-preview-3891--kubernetes-sigs-gateway-api.netlify.app/geps/gep-3779/

### **DENY Policies**

* A **DENY** policy is restrictive and takes precedence over ALLOW.
* If a request matches any rule in a DENY policy, it is immediately rejected, regardless of matching ALLOW rules elsewhere.
* DENY policies enable to define global blocks or exceptions (for example: “block all traffic from Namespace X”).

### **ALLOW vs. DENY Semantics**

* **DENY always wins.** If both an ALLOW and a DENY policy match a request, the DENY policy blocks it.
* The presence of any authorization policy causes the system to default to **deny-by-default** for matching workloads.
* Another bullet to re-clarify the one above - the default behavior when no policies select a target workload is to allow all traffic. However, **as soon as at least one `AuthorizationPolicy` targets a workload, the model becomes implicitly deny-if-not-allowed**.

### **Target of Authorization**

The `targetRef` of the policy specifies the workload(s) to which the policy applies. Two options are available for `targetRef`:

#### **Option 1: Targeting a Service**

The `targetRef` can point to a Kubernetes `Service`.

> Two implementation options when targeting a service:

Reviewer 6: Should always capitalize k8s resource names:
```suggestion
Two implementation options when targeting a Service:
```

1. Apply authorization policy to all traffic addressed to this Service.

1. Apply authorization policy to all workloads (pods) selected by the Service.

**Benefits:**

* **No API Extension Required:** Works with the current PolicyAttachment model in Gateway API without modification.
* **Simplicity:** Intuitive for users familiar with Kubernetes networking concepts.

> **Downsides and Open Questions:**

Reviewer 6: Some form of header would work better here, existing formatting is not working as intended: https://deploy-preview-3891--kubernetes-sigs-gateway-api.netlify.app/geps/gep-3779/

However, targeting a `Service` introduces several challenges;

##### Loss Of Service Context

If we go with option 1, apply authorization policy to all traffic addressed to a service;
  This option is very tricky to implement for sidecar-based meshes where the destination sidecar has no knowledge of which Service the request came through.

>   Here is the very high-level tarffic flow for sidecar-based meshes:

Reviewer 6: Nit: Indentation feels off here

Below is a pseudo example:

```yaml
targetRefs:
- Kind: Pod
  Selector:
    matchExpression:
    - { key: "purpose", operator: NotIn, values: ["gateway"] }
```

##### **Enhanced Discoverability with `gwctl`**

A key challenge with `LabelSelector` is the loss of discoverability. It’s easier to see which policies target a `Service` but difficult to determine which policies might affect a specific pod.

To address this, **investment in tooling is required.** Specifically, the `gwctl` CLI tool should be enhanced to provide insights such as:

```sh
gwctl describe pods pod1 

...
InheritedPolicies:
  Type                   Name                                 Target Kind   Target Name/Expression
  ----                   ----                                 -----------   -----------
  AuthorizationPolicy  demo-authz-policy-on-payment-pods      Pod           Selector={foo: a, bar: 2}
...

# List all AuthorizationPolicy resources in json format in the active namespace
gwctl get authorizationPolicy -o json

```

Without dedicated tooling, the `LabelSelector` approach could significantly degrade the user experience and observability.

> #### Recommended Option - Hybrid TargetRef and VAP

Reviewer 6: This GEP spends a lot of time talking about all the various options that are being considered and buries the proposal pretty far through. I'd recommend pulling this up to the top and listing the rest as alternatives considered.

Adding only the recommendation below, please see [https://docs.google.com/document/d/1CeagBnHDPbzpYAxBmtJqTshxAW8l-aRPwvwgAGbnv2I/edit?tab=t.0](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1CeagBnHDPbzpYAxBmtJqTshxAW8l-aRPwvwgAGbnv2I/edit?tab=t.0) for a comprehensive comparison for design options for TargetRef.

> Create one unified authorization policy API with implementation-specific validation using Validating Admission Policies (VAP). Additionally introducing a new `enforcementLevel` enum to simplify validation and enable the user to clarify intent.

Reviewer 6: It's not obvious to me that everything below this is intended to be future work and not part of this phase of the GEP, recommend clarifying and putting all of this in a "Future Work" section.

```go

// EnforcementLevel defines the scope at which an AuthorizationPolicy is enforced.
//
// There are two enforcement levels:
//
//   - NETWORK: Enforces the policy at the network layer (L4), typically at
//     network proxies or gateway dataplanes. Only supports attributes available
//     at connection time (e.g., source identity, port). Recommended for broad,
//     coarse-grained access controls.
//
//   - APPLICATION: Enforces the policy at the application layer (L7), typically at
//     HTTP/gRPC-aware sidecars or L7 proxies. Enables fine-grained authorization
//     using protocol-specific attributes (e.g., HTTP paths, methods).
//
// This field clarifies policy intent and informs where enforcement is expected
// to happen. It also enables implementation-specific validation and behavior.
//

> // +kubebuilder:validation:Enum=NETWORK;APPLICATION

Reviewer 6: Seems strange to make these all-caps?

> type EnforcementLevel string

Reviewer 5: Please include this in API spec as well. If we add it in future, it may bring some breaking changes.

)

// AuthorizationPolicySpec defines the desired state of AuthorizationPolicy.
type AuthorizationPolicySpec struct {
    // TargetRef identifies the resource this policy is attached to.
    // +kubebuilder:validation:Required
    TargetRefs []gatewayv1.PolicyTargetReferenceWithLabelSelectors `json:"targetRefs"`

    // Action specifies the action to take when a request matches the rules.
    // +kubebuilder:validation:Required
    Action AuthorizationPolicyAction `json:"action"`

    // Rules defines the list of authorization rules.
    // A request matches the policy if it matches any of these rules.
    // +optional
    Rules []AuthorizationRule `json:"rules,omitempty"`
}

// AuthorizationRule defines a single authorization rule.
// A request matches the rule if it matches ALL fields specified.
type AuthorizationRule struct {
    // AuthorizationSource specifies who is making the request.
    // If omitted, matches any source.
    // +optional
    AuthorizationSource *AuthorizationSource `json:"authorizationSource,omitempty"`

    // NetworkAttributes specifies TCP-level matching criteria.
    // If omitted, matches any TCP traffic.
    // +optional

>     NetworkAttributes *AuthorizationNetworkAttributes `json:"networkAttributes,omitempty"`

Reviewer 5: imo this is a bit confusing. Ports are there in NetworkAttributes and in future we may add AuthorizationApplicationAttribute (with L7 field). What if someone has requirements to add port and host in the same rule? How can they do that?

We should have Source and Destination instead. Source must have all the client side attributes and destination should have all the server side attributes.

Author: Can you elaborate on ` users wanted different policies associated with different ports` ?

I want to understand why would a user want that. My experience is that users want to distinguish enforcement for different ports, like "allow port 8080, disallow the rest", as an example. 

See also https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/3891#discussion_r2193557656 for how it substantially change the semantics we are building.

Author: >The most basic example is a monolith serving different applications on different ports. I want to allow web to connect to backend:80 where the API is served from, but not the Prometheus endpoint running in the same pod on backend:9090 (speaking of, Prometheus is likely a good use case to consider for clusterwide policies beyond default-deny).

This is a clear and well understood example - and it is supported with this API. The thing that was not clear is the word **associated**, meaning the port becomes part of the target and not the request attribute. Which is what I had concerns. Shared more in https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/3891#discussion_r2193557656

Reviewer 2: Coming back to this, after having not given it too much thought earlier, @kflynn I'm somewhat increasingly convinced that specifying port in NetworkAttributes is preferable to target, because it encourages relative centralization of authorization policies for mulit-port services in a single resource. I'd much rather end up with a policy like the example below than likely being forced to write two separate policy resources for different port targets for the same workload (both because we're limiting targetRefs to one item if using a selector and because even if the action were the same, the sources would likely be different).

```yaml
spec:
    targetRefs:
        kind: Pod
        selector:
            matchLabels:
                application: foo
    action: Allow
    rules:
    // allow any identity to access the public HTTP server on port 80
    - networkAttributes:
          port: 80
    // only allow the `admin` ServiceAccount to access the control panel API on port 2083
    - sources:
      - type: ServiceAccount
        serviceAccount:
          name: admin
          namespace: admin 
      networkAttributes:
          port: 2083
```

It might still be necessary to reconcile several different policies that affect the same target workload, _especially_ with differing label selectors (e.g. combined with example below), but that would likely be more of an outlier for namespace-wide or potentially cluster-wide policies in the future.

```yaml
spec:
    targetRefs:
        kind: Pod
        selector: {}
    action: Allow
    rules:
    - sources:
      - type: ServiceAccount
        serviceAccount:
          name: prometheus
          namespace: prometheus 
      networkAttributes:
          port: 9090
```

    // FOR FUTURE ENHANCEMENT!!

    // ApplicationAttributes defines optional application-layer (L7) matching criteria
    // used to authorize requests when enforcement is at the APPLICATION level.
    //
    // All specified fields must match for the rule to apply (logical AND). If omitted,
    // the rule matches all application-layer traffic.
    //
    // Typical use cases include protocol-aware authorization for HTTP, gRPC, or other L7 traffic.
    // Fields may vary in applicability based on the protocol and implementation support.
    //
    // NOTE: ApplicationAttributes are only meaningful when `enforcementLevel` is set to
    // APPLICATION. Implementations MUST ignore or reject these fields if used at NETWORK level.

    // +optional

>     ApplicationAttributes *AuthorizationApplicationAttributes `json:"applicationAttributes,omitempty"`

Reviewer 6: This is already covered elsewhere, recommend leaving it out of API types.

More on https://docs.cilium.io/en/stable/internals/security-identities/ & https://docs.cilium.io/en/stable/security/network/identity/

> ## API

Reviewer 6: I recommend moving this above the state of the world section.

Author: ack

This GEP introduces a new policy resource, `AuthorizationPolicy`, for **identity-based** authorization. The policy defines a target, a single action (`ALLOW` or `DENY`), and a set of rules that include sources (the “who”) and an optional port attribute.

### **Policy Rules**

Each `AuthorizationPolicy` resource contains a list of rules. A request matches the policy if it matches **any** rule in the list (logical OR). Each rule defines multiple matching criteria; a request matches a rule only if it matches **all** criteria within that rule (logical AND).

A rule may specify:

* **Sources:** The source identities to which the rule applies. A request’s identity must match one of the listed sources. Supported source kinds are:  
  * **SPIFFE ID**
  * **Kubernetes ServiceAccount**  
  * **Kubernetes Namespace**  

> * **Attributes:** Conditions on the target workload, at the time of writing this, only port is supported. If no attributes are specified, the rule applies to all traffic toward the target.

Reviewer 6: The formatting is not working as intended - see https://deploy-preview-3891--kubernetes-sigs-gateway-api.netlify.app/geps/gep-3779/.

### **ALLOW Policies**

> * An **ALLOW** policy is permissive.  

Reviewer 6: Nit: A lot of trailing spaces in this GEP. Recommend configuring your editor/tooling of choice to automatically trim them.

* A request is allowed if:  
  * It matches at least one rule in any ALLOW policy targeting the workload **and**  

>   * It is not explicitly denied by any DENY policy.  

Reviewer 6: Same comment as above re: list formatting

* If no ALLOW policy exists for a workload, traffic is permitted by default, unless any DENY policy applies.

### **DENY Policies**

* A **DENY** policy is restrictive and takes precedence over ALLOW.  
* If a request matches any rule in a DENY policy, it is immediately rejected, regardless of matching ALLOW rules elsewhere.  
* DENY policies enable to define global blocks or exceptions (for example: “block all traffic from Namespace X”).

### **ALLOW vs. DENY Semantics**

* **DENY always wins.** If both an ALLOW and a DENY policy match a request, the DENY policy blocks it.  
* The presence of any authorization policy causes the system to default to **deny-by-default** for matching workloads.
* Another bullet to re-clarify the one above - the default behavior when no policies select a target workload is to allow all traffic. However, **as soon as at least one `AuthorizationPolicy` targets a workload, the model becomes implicitly deny-if-not-allowed**.

### **Target of Authorization**

> The `targetRef` of the policy specifies the workload(s) to which the policy applies. Two options are available for `targetRef`:

Reviewer 7: Option 3: ServiceAccount?

> #### **Option 1: Targeting a Service**

Reviewer 6: I seem to remember "ServiceAccount" being raised as a potential option at a previous KubeCon when this topic came up. I think it ended up being deemed impractical/poor UX, but could be good to cover it here for completeness.

The `targetRef` can point to a Kubernetes `Service`.

**Benefits:**

* **No API Extension Required:** Works with the current PolicyAttachment model in Gateway API without modification.  
* **Simplicity:** Intuitive for users familiar with Kubernetes networking concepts.

> **Downsides and Open Questions:**

Author: added some more clarifications above. the TL;DR is that I think there is no consistent/good way for a the (dst) component that enforces authorization to know what service was dialed, mainly with sidecar-based meshes.

So if we were to go with Service, the answer to you question would probably be yes, cause we will use the workload selector from the service. But this brings other complications that I described above

> **Downsides and Open Questions:**

Author: updates relevant sections and recommendations. resolving this, but feel free to re-open

* Directly applies policy to pods, avoiding ambiguity present when targeting services. Ensures policies are enforced exactly where intended, regardless of how many services a pod might belong to.  
* Policies can apply to any workload, including pods not exposed via a `Service`, providing a comprehensive authorization solution.

**Downsides and Open Questions:**

The main downside of `LabelSelector` is the huge increase to the complexity of policy discoverability. See below for more info.

**Requirement: Enhancing Policy Attachment:**

This option depends on enhancements to Gateway API’s policy attachment model to support `LabelSelector` as a valid `targetRef`. This capability was discussed and received consensus at KubeCon North America 2024 and was originally in scope for GEP-713 but deferred for a future PR to keep GEP-713 focused on stabilizing what we already have (See [https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/3609#discussion_r2053376938](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/3609#discussion_r2053376938)).

##### **Experimental Pattern**

> To mitigate some of the concerns, `LabelSelector` support in policy attachment is designated as an **experimental pattern**.

Reviewer 6: For the record, I really hate the combination of label selectors and policy attachment because we'd be combining 2 topics that are already quite complicated. With that said, this has been a widely requested feature, and testing it out in a relatively controlled way seems ~ok to me. We need to be ready to pivot to another approach if this doesn't work and/or ends up being too complicated.

Here is how it is going to look like:

```go

// PolicyTargetReferenceWithLabelSelectors specifies a reference to a set of Kubernetes
// objects by Group and Kind, with an optional label selector to narrow down the matching
// objects.
//
// Currently, we only support label selectors when targeting Pods.
// This restriction is intentional to limit the complexity and potential
// ambiguity of supporting label selectors for arbitrary Kubernetes kinds.
// Unless there is a very strong justification in the future, we plan to keep this
// functionality limited to selecting Pods only.
//
// This is currently experimental in the Gateway API and should only be used
// for policies implemented within Gateway API. It is currently not intended for general-purpose
// use outside of Gateway API resources.
// +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule="!(has(self.selector)) || (self.kind == 'Pod' && (self.group == '' || self.group == 'core'))",message="Selector may only be set when targeting Pods."

> type PolicyTargetReferenceWithLabelSelectors struct {

Reviewer 5: will this "PolicyTargetReferenceWithLabelSelectors" ever be applicable for Gateways? 
Gateways can be in-cluster and defined via K8s workload (Gateway may have a pod with some labels). If someone uses the pod labels for the gateway, do we select that Gateway with these semantics?

Reviewer 4: I think that's a reasonable question that is one of the reasons that we haven't done label selecctors for _pods_ before.

Reviewer 7: Tricky, a gateway implemented by a pod in k8s is both a workload unto itself, and also a proxy for 0 or more other "entities". In some cases it might be handy to be able to express that certain identities can talk to a gateway (and by extension, may be allowed to talk to entities that gateway proxies for) independent of expressing policy against all the disparate entities which that gateway is a proxy for.

Author: I would say YES. With the option to exclude it if necessary (using the right label selector combination). Though as Ian pointed out there are cases where it will be useful to be able to distribute the policies to the gateway (which is also a workload in this case).

Author: added sections about it, PTAL!

  // Group is the group of the target object.
  Group Group `json:"group"`

  // Kind is the kind of the target object.
  Kind Kind `json:"kind"`

  // Selector is the label selector of target objects of the specified kind.
  Selector *metav1.LabelSelector `json:"selector"`
}

```

##### **Enhanced Discoverability with `gwctl`**

A key challenge with `LabelSelector` is the loss of discoverability. It’s easier to see which policies target a `Service` but difficult to determine which policies might affect a specific pod.

To address this, **investment in tooling is required.** Specifically, the `gwctl` CLI tool should be enhanced to provide insights such as:

```sh
TODO: complete gwctl commands
```

> Without dedicated tooling, the `LabelSelector` approach could significantly degrade the user experience and observability.

Reviewer 4: This section is critical for making label selectors actually be understandable. As it stands, they are the very definition of spooky action at a distance - if you don't know to go and look for an AuthorizationPolicy, then requests will randomly fail or succeed based on things outside your control.

### API Design

```go

type AuthorizationPolicy struct {
    metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
    metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`

    // Spec defines the desired state of AuthorizationPolicy.
    Spec AuthorizationPolicySpec `json:"spec,omitempty"`

    // Status defines the current state of AuthorizationPolicy.
    Status PolicyStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`
}

// AuthorizationPolicyAction specifies the action to take.
// +kubebuilder:validation:Enum=ALLOW;DENY
type AuthorizationPolicyAction string

const (
    // ActionAllow allows requests that match the policy rules.
    ActionAllow AuthorizationPolicyAction = "ALLOW"
    // ActionDeny denies requests that match the policy rules.
    ActionDeny AuthorizationPolicyAction = "DENY"
)

// AuthorizationPolicySpec defines the desired state of AuthorizationPolicy.
type AuthorizationPolicySpec struct {
    // TargetRef identifies the resource this policy is attached to.
    // +kubebuilder:validation:Required

>     TargetRefs gatewayv1.PolicyTargetReferenceWithLabelSelectors `json:"targetRefs"`

Reviewer 5: how can we target the entire namespace? ns-wide authz policies are very common for meshes.

And with ns-wide policy we need to think about the clear separation between Gateway and mesh. This could be a valid scenario that Gateway and mesh workload are in the same namespace and user just wants to apply policy on namespace affecting only mesh workloads.

Author: added more section about this. PTAL!

    // Action specifies the action to take when a request matches the rules.
    // +kubebuilder:validation:Required

>     Action AuthorizationPolicyAction `json:"action"`

Reviewer 5: can you also define the UX for DENY_BY_DEFAULT policies and how a users can add allow rules to override deny_by_default posture.
Use Case (Assuming we have ns wide policy support as well) - User has created a deny all policy for the namespace, now workload owners add Allow policies for the workloads.

Author: For now, we will use "allow nothing" for that. As the GEP suggests to standardize the common semantics of "once you have an allow policy" everything else has to be allowed, or else it is denied.

In the future, if we believe this is useful, we can introduce an enum/field with something like this to be more explicit

    // TCPRules defines the list of matching criteria. A request is considered to
    // match the policy if it matches any of the rules.
    // +optional

>     TCPRules []AuthorizationTCPRule `json:"tcpRules,omitempty"`

Reviewer 6: This is a list of lists of lists, does each layer need to have its own distinct list? The exponential nature of this pattern can get pretty awful. We're currently missing max lengths for each of these, but let's just assume that we say 16 across the board. That means that we could end up needing support 4096 distinct sources in just one policy.

Reviewer 6: Some ideas to potentially simplify this to 256 by removing one of the layers of lists:

Before
```yaml
tcpRules:
- authorizationSources:
  - identities: [foo]
  - namespaces: [bar]
```

After v1
```yaml
tcpRules:
- authorizationSource:
  - identity: foo
  - namespace: bar
```

After v2
```yaml
tcpRules:
- authorizationSource:
    identities: [foo]
    namespaces: [bar] 
```

}

// AuthorizationTCPRule defines a set of criteria for matching a TCP request.
// A request must match all specified criteria.
type AuthorizationTCPRule struct {
    // Sources specifies a list of identities that are matched by this rule.
    // If this field is empty, this rule matches all sources.
    // A request matches if its identity is present in this list.
    // +optional
    Sources []AuthorizationSource `json:"sources,omitempty"`

    // Attributes specifies a list of properties that are matched by this rule.
    // If this field is empty, this rule matches all attributes.
    // A request matches if its attributes are present in this list.
    //
    // +optional

>     Attributes []AuthorizationTCPAttributes `json:"attributes,omitempty"`

Author: (changed it to NetworkAttributes, and ApplicationAttributes) but wonder what does destination implies here in your opinion? these are request attributes.

}

// AuthorizationSource specifies the source of a request.
// Only one of its fields may be set.
// +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule="(size(self.identities) > 0 ? 1 : 0) + (size(self.serviceAccounts) > 0 ? 1 : 0) + (size(self.namespaces) > 0 ? 1 : 0) == 1",message="Exactly one of identities, serviceAccounts, or namespaces must be specified."
type AuthorizationSource struct {

    // Identities specifies a list of identities that are matched by this rule.
    // A request's identity must be present in this list to match the rule.
    //
    // Identities must be specified as SPIFFE-formatted URIs following the pattern:
    //   spiffe://<trust_domain>/<workload-identifier>
    //
    // While the exact workload identifier structure is implementation-specific,
    // implementations are encouraged to follow the convention of
    // `spiffe://<trust_domain>/ns/<namespace>/sa/<serviceaccount>`

>     // when representing Kubernetes workload identities.

Reviewer 6: Why would someone use this matcher to refer to Kubernetes identities when the `serviceAccounts` list is below? Is this intended primarily for cross-cluster use cases?

Author: JWTs are explicitly higher level, and would probably have their own definition. 

I dont think we are actually opinionated on where implementation is getting the info in this API. we just listed a few options.

ServiceAccounts is just a way to make things more convenient for users with less-advanced needs. Istio has it, and I am pretty sure linkerd as well. So think of it as a way for the user to provide the service accounts (constructs they are probably _more_ familiar with) then knowing and specifying the full identity in the required URI format. 

For more context, initially I had also proposed Namespace field, but based on previous feedback here, we settled on ServiceAccounts as an easier way for common auth usecases -- see [this](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/3891/files#diff-6886a6f78647100500384beb636df7b6487717be6d9f8366f50d8a0bd3581927R395-R401) as well.

Coming up with yet another reserved string prefix for serviceAccounts is more confusing imo, and will probably as well come at a cost of looser validation

    // Note for reviewers: While this GEP primarily focuses on identity-based 
    // authorization where identity is often established at the transport layer,
    // some implementations might derive identity from authenticated tokens or sources
    // within the request itself.
    //
    // +optional
    Identities []string `json:"identities,omitempty"`

    // ServiceAccounts specifies a list of Kubernetes Service Accounts that are
    // matched by this rule. Each service account must be specified in the format
    // "<namespace>/<service-account-name>". A request originating from a pod
    // associated with one of these service accounts will match the rule.
    //
    // The ServiceAccounts listed here are expected to exist within the same
    // trust domain as the targeted workload, which in many environments means
    // the same Kubernetes cluster. Cross-cluster or cross-trust-domain should
    // be expressed with Identities field.
    // +optional
    ServiceAccounts []string `json:"serviceAccounts,omitempty"`

    // Namespaces specifies a list of Kubernetes Namespaces that are matched
    // by this rule. A request originating from any pod within one of these

>     // namespaces will match the rule, regardless of its specific Service Account.

Reviewer 6: So this is basically just another way of saying "match all ServiceAccounts in these namespaces"? Given the proposed format of ServiceAccounts is `ns/name` above, would `ns/*` be a reasonable alternative way to express this instead of having a separate field in the API?

Author: applied the recommendation - ptal
